--- RDNA2 PAGE 15 ---
Chapter 2. Program Organization
RDNA kernels are programs executed by the RDNA processor. Conceptually, the kernel is
executed independently on every work-item, but in reality the RDNA processor groups 32 or 64
work-items into a wavefront, which executes the kernel on all 32 or 64 work-items in one pass.
The RDNA processor consists of:
• A scalar ALU, which operates on one value per wavefront (common to all work items).
• A vector ALU, which operates on unique values per work-item.
• Local data storage, which allows work-items within a workgroup to communicate and share
data.
• Scalar memory, which can transfer data between SGPRs and memory through a cache.
• Vector memory, which can transfer data between VGPRs and memory, including sampling
texture maps.
All kernel control flow is handled using scalar ALU instructions. This includes if/else, branches
and looping. Scalar ALU (SALU) and memory instructions work on an entire wavefront and
operate on up to two SGPRs, as well as literal constants.
Vector memory and ALU instructions operate on all work-items in the wavefront at one time. In
order to support branching and conditional execute, every wavefront has an EXECute mask that
determines which work-items are active at that moment, and which are dormant. Active work-
items execute the vector instruction, and dormant ones treat the instruction as a NOP. The
EXEC mask can be changed at any time by Scalar ALU instructions.
Vector ALU instructions can take up to three arguments, which can come from VGPRs, SGPRs,
or literal constants that are part of the instruction stream. They operate on all work-items
enabled by the EXEC mask. Vector compare and add with- carryout return a bit-per-work-item
mask back to the SGPRs to indicate, per work-item, which had a "true" result from the compare
or generated a carry-out.
Vector memory instructions transfer data between VGPRs and memory. Each work-item
supplies its own memory address and supplies or receives unique data. These instructions are
also subject to the EXEC mask.
2.1. Wave32 and Wave64
The shader hardware is designed to support both wavefronts of 32 workitems ("wave32") and
wavefronts of 64 workitems ("wave64"). Both wave sizes are supported for all operations, but
shader programs must be compiled for a particular wave size. The underlying hardware is
primarily natively wave32, and wave64 vector ALU and memory operations are executed by
issuing the instruction twice: once for the low 32 workitems, and then again for the high 32
workitems. Either half of the execution of a wave64 may be skipped if there is no work to do for
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
2.1. Wave32 and Wave64
7 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 16 ---
that half (i.e. EXEC == 0 for that half). Wave64 VALU instructions which return a scalar (SGPR
or VCC) value do not skip either pass. Wave64 Vector Memory instructions can skip either pass,
but do not skip both passes.
The upper half of EXEC and VCC are ignored for wave32 waves.
2.2. Compute Shaders
Compute kernels (shaders) are generic programs that can run on the RDNA processor, taking
data from memory, processing it, and writing results back to memory. Compute kernels are
created by a dispatch, which causes the RDNA processors to run the kernel over all of the work-
items in a 1D, 2D, or 3D grid of data. The RDNA processor walks through this grid and
generates wavefronts, which then run the compute kernel. Each work-item is initialized with its
unique address (index) within the grid. Based on this index, the work-item computes the
address of the data it is required to work on and what to do with the results.
2.3. Data Sharing
The AMD RDNA stream processors are designed to share data between different work-items.
Data sharing can boost performance. The figure below shows the memory hierarchy that is
available to each work-item.
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
2.2. Compute Shaders
8 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 17 ---
Figure 2. Shared Memory Hierarchy
2.3.1. Local Data Share (LDS)
Each workgroup processor (WGP) has a 128 kB memory space that enables low-latency
communication between work-items within a workgroup, or the work-items within a wavefront;
this is the local data share (LDS). This memory is configured with 64 banks, each with 512
entries of 4 bytes. The AMD RDNA processors use a 128 kB local data share (LDS) memory for
each WGP; this enables 128 kB of low-latency bandwidth to the processing elements. The
shared memory contains 64 integer atomic units to enable fast, unordered atomic operations.
This memory can be used as a software cache for predictable re-use of data, a data exchange
machine for the work-items of a workgroup, or as a cooperative way to enable efficient access
to off-chip memory. A single workgroup may allocate up to 64kB of LDS space.
LDS Allocation Modes
When a workgroup is dispatched or a graphics draw is launched, the waves can allocate LDS
space in one of two modes: CU or WGP mode. The shader can simultaneously execute some
waves in LDS mode and other waves in CU mode.
• CU mode: in this mode, the LDS is effectively split into a separate upper and lower LDS,
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
2.3. Data Sharing
9 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 18 ---
each serving two SIMD32’s.
Wave are allocated LDS space within the half of LDS which is associated with the SIMD the
wave is running on.
For workgroups, all waves are assigned to the pair of SIMD32’s. This mode may provide
faster operation since both halves run in parallel, but limits data sharing
(upper waves cannot read data in the lower half of LDS and vice versa).
When in CU mode, all waves in the workgroup are resident within the same CU.
• WGP mode: in this mode, the LDS is one large contiguous memory that all waves on the
WGP can access.
In WGP mode, waves of a workgroup may be distributed across both CU’s (all 4 SIMD32’s)
in the WGP.
2.3.2. Global Data Share (GDS)
The AMD RDNA devices use a 64 kB global data share (GDS) memory that can be used by
wavefronts of a kernel on all WGPs. This memory provides 128 bytes per cycle of memory
access to all the processing elements. The GDS is configured with 32 banks, each with 512
entries of 4 bytes each. It is designed to provide full access to any location for any processor.
The shared memory contains 32 integer atomic units to enable fast, unordered atomic
operations. This memory can be used as a software cache to store important control data for
compute kernels, reduction operations, or a small global shared surface. Data can be preloaded
from memory prior to kernel launch and written to memory after kernel completion. The GDS
block contains support logic for unordered append/consume and domain launch ordered
append/consume operations to buffers in memory. These dedicated circuits enable fast
compaction of data or the creation of complex data structures in memory.
2.4. Device Memory
The AMD RDNA devices offer several methods for access to off-chip memory from the
processing elements (PE) within each WGP. On the primary read path, the device consists of
multiple channels of L2 cache that provides data to Read-only L1 caches, and finally to L0
caches per WGP. Specific cache-less load instructions can force data to be retrieved from
device memory during an execution of a load clause. Load requests that overlap within the
clause are cached with respect to each other. The output cache is formed by two levels of
cache: the first for write-combining cache (collect scatter and store operations and combine
them to provide good access patterns to memory); the second is a read/write cache with atomic
units that lets each processing element complete unordered atomic accesses that return the
initial value. Each processing element provides the destination address on which the atomic
operation acts, the data to be used in the atomic operation, and a return address for the
read/write atomic unit to store the pre-op value in memory. Each store or atomic operation can
be set up to return an acknowledgment to the requesting PE upon write confirmation of the
return value (pre-atomic op value at destination) being stored to device memory.
This acknowledgment has two purposes:
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
2.4. Device Memory
10 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 19 ---
• enabling a PE to recover the pre-op value from an atomic operation by performing a cache-
less load from its return address after receipt of the write confirmation acknowledgment,
and
• enabling the system to maintain a relaxed consistency model.
Each scatter write from a given PE to a given memory channel maintains order. The
acknowledgment enables one processing element to implement a fence to maintain serial
consistency by ensuring all writes have been posted to memory prior to completing a
subsequent write. In this manner, the system can maintain a relaxed consistency model
between all parallel work-items operating on the system.
2.5. Shader Padding Requirement
Due to aggressive instruction prefetching used in some graphics devices, the user must pad all
shaders with 64 extra dwords (256 bytes) of data past the end of the shader. It is recommended
to use the S_CODE_END instruction as padding. This ensures that if the instruction prefetch
hardware goes beyond the end of the shader, it may not reach into uninitialized memory (or
unmapped memory pages).
The amount of shader padding required is related to how far the shader hardware may prefetch
ahead. The shader can be set to prefetch 1, 2 or 3 cachelines (64 bytes) ahead of the current
program counter. This is controlled via a wave-launch state register, or by the shader program
itself with S_INST_PREFETCH.
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
2.5. Shader Padding Requirement
11 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 20 ---
Chapter 3. Kernel State
This chapter describes the kernel states visible to the shader program.
3.1. State Overview
The table below shows the hardware states readable or writable by a shader program. All
registers below are unique to each wave except for TBA and TMA which are shared.
Table 2. Readable and Writable Hardware States
Abbrev.
Name
Size
(bits)
Description
PC
Program Counter
48
Points to the memory address of the next shader
instruction to execute.
V0-V255
VGPR
32
Vector general-purpose register.
S0-S105
SGPR
32
Scalar general-purpose register.
LDS
Local Data Share
64kB
Local data share is a scratch RAM with built-in
arithmetic capabilities that allow data to be shared
between threads in a workgroup.
EXEC
Execute Mask
64
A bit mask with one bit per thread, which is applied to
vector instructions and controls that threads execute
and that ignore the instruction.
EXECZ
EXEC is zero
1
A single bit flag indicating that the EXEC mask is all
zeros.
VCC
Vector Condition Code
64
A bit mask with one bit per thread; it holds the result
of a vector compare operation.
VCCZ
VCC is zero
1
A single bit-flag indicating that the VCC mask is all
zeros.
SCC
Scalar Condition Code
1
Result from a scalar ALU comparison instruction.
FLAT_SCRATCH
Flat scratch address
64
The base address of scratch memory.
STATUS
Status
32
Read-only shader status bits.
MODE
Mode
32
Writable shader mode bits.
M0
Memory Reg
32
A temporary register that has various uses, including
GPR indexing and bounds checking.
TRAPSTS
Trap Status
32
Holds information about exceptions and pending
traps.
TBA
Trap Base Address
64
Holds the pointer to the current trap handler program.
TMA
Trap Memory Address
64
Temporary register for shader operations. For
example, can hold a pointer to memory used by the
trap handler.
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
3.1. State Overview
12 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 21 ---
Abbrev.
Name
Size
(bits)
Description
TTMP0-TTMP15
Trap Temporary SGPRs
32
16 SGPRs available only to the Trap Handler for
temporary storage.
VMCNT
Vector memory instruction
count
6
Counts the number of VMEM load instructions issued
but not yet completed.
VSCNT
Vector memory instruction
count
6
Counts the number of VMEM store instructions
issued but not yet completed.
EXPCNT
Export Count
3
Counts the number of Export and GDS instructions
issued but not yet completed. Also counts VMEM
writes that have not yet sent their write-data to the
last level cache.
LGKMCNT
LDS, GDS, Constant and
Message count
4
Counts the number of LDS, GDS, constant-fetch
(scalar memory read), and message instructions
issued but not yet completed.
3.2. Program Counter (PC)
The program counter (PC) is a byte address pointing to the next instruction to execute. When a
wavefront is created, the PC is initialized to the first instruction in the program.
The PC interacts with three instructions: S_GET_PC, S_SET_PC, S_SWAP_PC. These transfer
the PC to, and from, an even-aligned SGPR pair.
Branches jump to (PC_of_the_instruction_after_the_branch + offset). The shader program
cannot directly read from, or write to, the PC. Branches, GET_PC and SWAP_PC, are PC-
relative to the next instruction, not the current one. S_TRAP saves the PC of the S_TRAP
instruction itself.
3.3. EXECute Mask
The Execute mask (64-bit) determines which threads in the vector are executed:
1 = execute, 0 = do not execute.
EXEC can be read from, and written to, through scalar instructions; it also can be written as a
result of a vector-ALU compare (V_CMPX). This mask affects vector-ALU, vector-memory, LDS,
GDS, and export instructions. It does not affect scalar (ALU or memory) execution or branches.
A helper bit (EXECZ) can be used as a condition for branches to skip code when EXEC is zero.
Wave32: the upper 32-bit of EXEC are ignored, and EXECZ represents the status of only the
lower 32-bits of EXEC.
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
3.2. Program Counter (PC)
13 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 22 ---
This GPU can optimize instruction execution when EXEC = 0.
The shader hardware can skip vector ALU and memory instructions if EXEC is known to
be zero, but with some limitations:
• VALU instructions can be skipped, unless they write SGPRs (these are not skipped)
• Wave64 memory instructions: can skip one half but not the entire instruction
• Wave32 memory instructions: not skipped
Use CBRANCH to rapidly skip over code when it is likely that the EXEC mask is zero.
3.4. Status registers
Status register fields can be read, but not written to, by the shader. These bits are initialized at
wavefront-creation time. The table below lists and briefly describes the status register fields.
Table 3. Status Register Fields
Field
Bit
Position
Description
SCC
1
Scalar condition code. Used as a carry-out bit. For a comparison instruction,
this bit indicates failure or success. For logical operations, this is 1 if the
result was non-zero.
SPI_PRIO
2:1
Wavefront priority set by the shader processor interpolator (SPI) when the
wavefront is created. See the S_SETPRIO instruction (page 12-49) for
details. 0 is lowest, 3 is highest priority.
USER_PRIO
4:3
User settable wave-priority set by the shader program. See the
S_SETPRIO instruction (page 12-49) for details.
PRIV
5
Privileged mode. Can only be active when in the trap handler. Gives write
access to the TTMP, TMA, and TBA registers.
TRAP_EN
6
Indicates that a trap handler is present. When set to zero, traps are not
taken.
TTRACE_EN
7
Indicates whether thread trace is enabled for this wavefront. If zero, also
ignore any shader-generated (instruction) thread-trace data.
EXPORT_RDY
8
This status bit indicates if export buffer space has been allocated. The
shader stalls any export instruction until this bit becomes 1. It is set to 1
when export buffer space has been allocated. Before a Pixel or Vertex
shader can export, the hardware checks the state of this bit. If the bit is 1,
export can be issued. If the bit is zero, the wavefront sleeps until space
becomes available in the export buffer. Then, this bit is set to 1, and the
wavefront resumes.
EXECZ
9
Exec mask is zero.
VCCZ
10
Vector condition code is zero.
IN_WG
11
Wavefront is a member of a work-group of more than one wavefront.
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
3.4. Status registers
14 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 23 ---
Field
Bit
Position
Description
IN_BARRIER
12
Wavefront is waiting at a barrier.
HALT
13
Wavefront is halted or scheduled to halt. HALT can be set by the host
through wavefront-control messages, or by the shader. This bit is ignored
while in the trap handler (PRIV = 1); it also is ignored if a host-initiated trap
is received (request to enter the trap handler).
TRAP
14
Wavefront is flagged to enter the trap handler as soon as possible.
TTRACE_SIMD_EN
15
Enables/disables thread trace for this SIMD. This bit allows more than one
SIMD to be outputting USERDATA (shader initiated writes to the thread-
trace buffer). Note that wavefront data is only traced from one SIMD per
shader engine. Wavefront user data (instruction based) can still be output if
this bit is zero.
VALID
16
Wavefront is active (has been created and not yet ended).
ECC_ERR
17
An ECC error has occurred.
SKIP_EXPORT
18
For Vertex Shaders only. 1 = this shader is not allocated export buffer
space; all export instructions are ignored (treated as NOPs). Formerly
called VS_NO_ALLOC. Used for stream-out of multiple streams (multiple
passes over the same VS), and for DS running in the VS stage for
wavefronts that produced no primitives.
PERF_EN
19
Performance counters are enabled for this wavefront.
COND_DBG_USER
20
Conditional debug indicator for user mode
COND_DBG_SYS
21
Conditional debug indicator for system mode.
FATAL_HALT
23
Set if the wave experienced a fatal error.
MUST_EXPORT
27
This wavefront is required to perform an export with Done=1 before
terminating.
3.5. Mode register
Mode register fields can be read from, and written to, by the shader through scalar instructions.
The table below lists and briefly describes the mode register fields.
Table 4. Mode Register Fields
Field
Bit
Position
Description
FP_ROUND
3:0
[1:0] Single precision round mode. [3:2] Double/Half-precision round mode.
Round Modes: 0=nearest even, 1= +infinity, 2= -infinity, 3= toward zero.
FP_DENORM
7:4
[1:0] Single denormal mode. [3:2] Double/Half-precision denormal mode.
Denorm modes:
0 = flush input and output denorms.
1 = allow input denorms, flush output denorms.
2 = flush input denorms, allow output denorms.
3 = allow input and output denorms.
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
3.5. Mode register
15 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 24 ---
Field
Bit
Position
Description
DX10_CLAMP
8
Used by the vector ALU to force DX10-style treatment of NaNs: when set,
clamp NaN to zero; otherwise, pass NaN through.
IEEE
9
Floating point opcodes that support exception flag gathering quiet and
propagate signaling NaN inputs per IEEE 754-2008. Min_dx10 and max_dx10
become IEEE 754-2008 compliant due to signaling NaN propagation and
quieting.
LOD_CLAMPED
10
Sticky bit indicating that one or more texture accesses had their LOD
clamped.
DEBUG
11
Forces the wavefront to jump to the exception handler after each instruction is
executed (but not after ENDPGM). Only works if TRAP_EN = 1.
EXCP_EN
20:12
Enable mask for exceptions. Enabled means if the exception occurs and
TRAP_EN==1, a trap is taken.
[12] : invalid.
[13] : inputDenormal.
[14] : float_div0.
[15] : overflow.
[16] : underflow.
[17] : inexact.
[18] : int_div0.
[19] : address watch
FP16_OVFL
23
If set, an overflowed FP16 result is clamped to +/- MAX_FP16, regardless of
round mode, while still preserving true INF values.
DISABLE_PERF
27
1 = disable performance counting for this wave
3.6. GPRs and LDS
This section describes how GPR and LDS space is allocated to a wavefront, as well as how out-
of-range and misaligned accesses are handled.
3.6.1. Out-of-Range behavior
This section defines the behavior when a source or destination GPR or memory address is
outside the legal range for a wavefront.
Out-of-range can occur through GPR-indexing or bad programming. It is illegal to index from
one register type into another (for example: SGPRs into trap registers or inline constants). It is
also illegal to index within inline constants.
The following describe the out-of-range behavior for various storage types.
• SGPRs
◦SGPRs cannot be "out of range".
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
3.6. GPRs and LDS
16 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 25 ---
However, it is illegal to index from one range to another, or for a 64-bit operand to
straddle two ranges.
The ranges are: [ SGPRs 0-105 and VCCH, VCCL], [ Trap Temps 0-15 ], [ all other
values ]
• VGPRs
◦It is illegal to index from SGPRs into VGPRs, or vice versa.
◦Out-of-range = (vgpr < 0 || (vgpr >= vgpr_size))
◦If a source VGPR is out of range, VGPR0 is used.
◦If a destination VGPR is out-of-range, the instruction is ignored and nothing is written
(treated as an NOP).
• LDS
◦If the LDS-ADDRESS is out-of-range (addr < 0 or > (MIN(lds_size, m0)):
▪Writes out-of-range are discarded; it is undefined if SIZE is not a multiple of write-
data-size.
▪Reads return the value zero.
◦If any source-VGPR is out-of-range, the VGPR0 value is used.
◦If the dest-VGPR is out of range, nullify the instruction (issue with exec=0)
• Memory, LDS, and GDS: Reads and atomics with returns.
◦If any source VGPR or SGPR is out-of-range, the data value is undefined.
◦If any destination VGPR is out-of-range, the operation is nullified by issuing the
instruction as if the EXEC mask were cleared to 0.
▪This out-of-range check must check all VGPRs that can be returned (for example:
VDST to VDST+3 for a BUFFER_LOAD_DWORDx4).
▪This check must also include the extra PRT (partially resident texture) VGPR and
nullify the fetch if this VGPR is out-of-range, no matter whether the texture system
actually returns this value or not.
▪Atomic operations with out-of-range destination VGPRs are nullified: issued, but
with exec mask of zero.
Instructions with multiple destinations (for example: V_ADDC): if any destination is out-of-range,
no results are written.
3.6.2. SGPR Allocation and storage
Every wavefront is allocated a fixed number of SGPRs:
• 106 normal SGPRs
• VCCh and VCCl (stored in SGPRs 106 and 107)
• 16 Trap-temporary SGPRs, meant for use by the trap handler
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
3.6. GPRs and LDS
17 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 26 ---
3.6.3. SGPR Alignment
Even-aligned SGPRs are required in the following cases.
• When 64-bit data is used. This is required for moves to/from 64-bit registers, including the
PC.
• When scalar memory reads that the address-base comes from an SGPR-pair (either in
SGPR).
Quad-alignment is required for the data-GPR when a scalar memory read returns four or more
Dwords. When a 64-bit quantity is stored in SGPRs, the LSBs are in SGPR[n], and the MSBs
are in SGPR[n+1].
3.6.4. VGPR Allocation and Alignment
VGPRs are allocated in groups of 8 Dwords for wave64, and 16 Dwords for wave32. Operations
using pairs of VGPRs (for example: double-floats) have no alignment restrictions. Physically,
allocations of VGPRs can wrap around the VGPR memory pool.
3.6.5. Wave Shared VGPRs
Wave64’s can be allocated wave-private and wave-shared VGPRs. Private GPRs are the
normal ones where each lane has a unique value. Shared VGPRS are shared between the high
and low halves of a wave64. This can be useful to reduce overall VGPR usage when combined
with subvector execution. Shared VGPRs are allocated in blocks of 16 Dwords.
Shared VGPRs logically occupy the VGPR addresses immediately following the private VGPRs.
E.g. if a wave has 8 private VGPRs, they are V0-V7 and shared VGPRs start at V8. If there are
16 shared VGPRs, they are accessed as V8-23.
Shared VGPRs cannot be used for: Exports or GDS.
3.6.6. LDS Allocation and Clamping
LDS is allocated per work-group or per-wavefront when work-groups are not in use. LDS space
is allocated to a work-group or wavefront in contiguous blocks of 256 Dwords on 256-Dword
alignment. LDS allocations do not wrap around the LDS storage. All accesses to LDS are
restricted to the space allocated to that wavefront/work-group.
3.7. M# Memory Descriptor
There is one 32-bit M# (M0) register per wavefront, which can be used for:
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
3.7. M# Memory Descriptor
18 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 27 ---
• Local Data Share (LDS)
◦Interpolation: holds { 1’b0, new_prim_mask[15:1], parameter_offset[15:0] } // in bytes
◦LDS direct-read offset and data type: { 13’b0, DataType[2:0], LDS_address[15:0] } //
addr in bytes
◦LDS “add_TID” read/write: { 16’h0, lds_offset[15:0] } // offset in bytes
• Global Data Share (GDS)
◦{ base[15:0] , size[15:0] } // base and size are in bytes
• Indirect GPR addressing for both vector and scalar instructions. M0 is an unsigned index.
• Send-message value. EMIT/CUT use M0 and EXEC as the send-message data.
• Index value used by S_MOVREL and V_MOVREL
3.8. SCC: Scalar Condition code
Most scalar ALU instructions set the Scalar Condition Code (SCC) bit, indicating the result of the
operation.
Compare operations: 1 = true
Arithmetic operations: 1 = carry out
Bit/logical operations: 1 = result was not zero
Move: does not alter SCC
The SCC can be used as the carry-in for extended-precision integer arithmetic, as well as the
selector for conditional moves and branches.
3.9. Vector Compares: VCC and VCCZ
Vector ALU comparisons set the Vector Condition Code (VCC) register (1=pass, 0=fail). Also,
vector compares have the option of setting EXEC to the VCC value.
There is also a VCC summary bit (vccz) that is set to 1 when the VCC result is zero. This is
useful for early-exit branch tests. VCC is also set for selected integer ALU operations (carry-
out).
Vector compares have the option of writing the result to VCC (32-bit instruction encoding) or to
any SGPR (64-bit instruction encoding). VCCZ is updated every time VCC is updated: vector
compares and scalar writes to VCC.
The EXEC mask determines which threads execute an instruction. The VCC indicates which
executing threads passed the conditional test, or which threads generated a carry-out from an
integer add or subtract.
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
3.8. SCC: Scalar Condition code
19 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 28 ---
V_CMP_* ⇒ VCC[n] = EXEC[n] & (test passed for thread[n])
VCC is fully written; there are no partial mask updates.

VCC physically resides in the SGPR register file, so when an instruction
sources VCC, that counts against the limit on the total number of SGPRs that
can be sourced for a given instruction. VCC physically resides in the highest
two user SGPRs.
When used by a wave32, the upper 32 bits of VCC are unused and only the lower 32 bits of
VCC contribute to the value of VCCZ.
3.10. Trap and Exception registers
Each type of exception can be enabled or disabled independently by setting, or clearing, bits in
the TRAPSTS register’s EXCP_EN field. This section describes the registers which control and
report kernel exceptions.
All Trap temporary SGPRs (TTMP*) are privileged for writes - they can be written only when in
the trap handler (status.priv = 1). When not privileged, writes to these are ignored. TMA and
TBA are read-only; they can be accessed through S_GETREG_B32.
When a trap is taken (either user initiated, exception or host initiated), the shader hardware is
designed to generate an S_TRAP instruction. This loads trap information into a pair of SGPRS:
{TTMP1, TTMP0} = {1'h0, pc_rewind[5:0], HT[0],trapID[7:0], PC[47:0]}.
HT is set to one for host initiated traps, and zero for user traps (s_trap) or exceptions. TRAP_ID
is zero for exceptions, or the user/host trapID for those traps. When the trap handler is entered,
the PC of the faulting instruction is: (PC - PC_rewind*4).
STATUS . TRAP_EN - This bit indicates to the shader whether or not a trap handler is present.
When one is not present, traps are not taken, no matter whether they’re floating point, user-, or
host-initiated traps. When the trap handler is present, the wavefront uses an extra 16 SGPRs for
trap processing. If trap_en == 0, all traps and exceptions are ignored, and s_trap is converted
by hardware to NOP.
MODE . EXCP_EN[8:0] - Floating point exception enables. Defines which exceptions and
events cause a trap.
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
3.10. Trap and Exception registers
20 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 29 ---
Bit
Exception
0
Invalid
1
Input Denormal
2
Divide by zero
3
Overflow
4
Underflow
5
Inexact
6
Integer divide by zero
7
Address Watch - the cache has witnessed a thread access to an
'address of interest'
3.10.1. Trap Status register
The trap status register records previously seen traps or exceptions. It can be read and written
by the kernel.
Table 5. Exception Field Bits
Field
Bits
Description
EXCP
8:0
Status bits of which exceptions have occurred. These bits are sticky and
accumulate results until the shader program clears them. These bits are
accumulated regardless of the setting of EXCP_EN. These can be read or
written without shader privilege.
Bit Exception
0 invalid
1 Input Denormal
2 Divide by zero
3 overflow
4 underflow
5 inexact
6 integer divide by zero
7 address watch 0
8 memory violation
SAVECTX
10
A bit set by the host command indicating that this wave must jump to its trap
handler and save its context. This bit must be cleared by the trap handler using
S_SETREG. Note - a shader can set this bit to 1 to cause a save-context trap,
and due to hardware latency the shader may execute up to 2 additional
instructions before taking the trap.
ILLEGAL_INST
11
An illegal instruction has been detected.
ADDR_WATCH1-3
14:12
Indicates that address watch 1, 2, or 3 has been hit. Bit 12 is address watch 1;
bit 13 is 2; bit 14 is 3.
BUFFER_OOB
15
A buffer instruction has addresses data which is out of range.
XNACK_ERROR
28
A memory address translation error has occurred.
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
3.10. Trap and Exception registers
21 of 283

--- RDNA2 PAGE 30 ---
Field
Bits
Description
DP_RATE
31:29
Determines how the shader interprets the TRAP_STS.cycle. Different Vector
Shader Processors (VSP) process instructions at different rates.
3.11. Memory Violations
A Memory Violation is reported from:
• LDS alignment error.
• Memory read/write/atomic alignment error.
• Flat access where the address is invalid (does not fall in any aperture).
• Write to a read-only surface.
• GDS alignment or address range error.
• GWS operation aborted (semaphore or barrier not executed).
Memory violations are not reported for instruction or scalar-data accesses.
Memory Buffer to LDS does NOT return a memory violation if the LDS address is out of range,
but masks off EXEC bits of threads that would go out of range.
When a memory access is in violation, the appropriate memory (LDS or cache) returns
MEM_VIOL to the wave. This is stored in the wave’s TRAPSTS.mem_viol bit. This bit is sticky,
so once set to 1, it remains at 1 until the user clears it.
Memory violations are fatal: if a trap handler is present and the wave is not already in the trap
handler, the wave jumps to the trap handler; otherwise it signals an interrupt and halt.
Memory violations are not precise. The violation is reported when the LDS or cache processes
the address; during this time, the wave may have processed many more instructions. When a
mem_viol is reported, the Program Counter saved is that of the next instruction to execute; it
has no relationship the faulting instruction.
3.12. Initial Wave State
When a wave is launched, some of the state data is pre-initialized. This section describes what
state is initialized per shader stage. Note that as usual in this spec, the shader stages refer to
hardware shader stages and these often are not identical to software shader stages.
State initialization is controlled by state registers which are defined in other documentation.
"RDNA 2" Instruction Set Architecture
3.11. Memory Violations
22 of 283

